CHAPTER VI It may seem odd to you, but it was two days
before I could follow up the newfound clue in what was manifestly the proper way. I felt
a peculiar shrinking from those pallid bodies. They were just the half-bleached color of
the worms and things one sees preserved in spirit in a zoological museum, and they were
filthily cold to the touch. Probably my shrinking was largely due to the sympathetic influence
of the Eloi, whose disgust of the Morlocks I now began to appreciate.
The next night I did not sleep well. Probably my health was a little disordered. I was oppressed
with perplexity and doubt. Once or twice I had a feeling of intense fear for which I
could perceive no definite reason. I remember creeping noiselessly into the great hall where
the little people were sleeping in the moonlight. That night Weena was among them, and feeling
reassured by their presence. It occurred to me even then that in the course of a few days
the moon must pass through its last quarter and the nights grow dark, when the appearances
of these unpleasant creatures from below, these whitened lemurs, this new vermin that
had replaced the old, might be more abundant. On both these days I had the restless feeling
of one who shirks an inevitable duty. I felt assured that the time machine was only to
be recovered by boldly penetrating these underground mysteries, yet I could not face the mystery.
If only I had a companion it would have been different, but I was so horribly alone, and
even to clamor down into the darkness of the well appalled me. I don't know if you will
understand my feeling, but I never felt quite safe at my back.
It was this restlessness, this insecurity perhaps, that drove me further and further
afield in my exploring expeditions. Going to the southwestward towards the rising country
that is now called Combe Wood, I observed far off in the direction of nineteenth century
Banstead a vast green structure, different in character from any I had hitherto seen.
It was larger than the largest of the palaces or ruins I knew, and the façade had an oriental
look, the face of it having the luster as well as the pale green tint, a kind of bluish
green, of a certain type of Chinese porcelain. This difference in aspect suggested a difference
in use, and I was minded to push on and explore. But the day was growing late, and I had come
upon the sight of the place after a long and tiring circuit, so I resolved to hold
over the adventure for the following day, and I returned to the welcome and the caresses
of little Weena. But next morning I perceived clearly enough that my curiosity regarding
the palace of green porcelain was a piece of self-deception, to enable me to shirk by
another day an experience I dreaded. I resolved I would make the descent without further waste
of time, and started out in the early morning towards a well, near the ruins of granite
and aluminum. Little Weena ran with me, she danced beside me to the well, but when she
saw me lean over the mouth and look downward, she seemed strangely disconcerted.
Goodbye, little Weena, I said, kissing her, and then putting her down, I began to feel
over the parapet for the climbing hooks. Rather hastily, I may as well confess, for I feared
my courage might leak away. At first she watched me in amazement, then she gave the most piteous
cry and running to me, she began to pull at me with her little hands. I think her opposition
nerve me rather to proceed. I shook her off, perhaps a little roughly, and in another moment
I was in the throat of the well. I saw her agonized face over the parapet and smiled
to reassure her. Then I had to look down at the unstable hooks to which I clung. I had
to clamor down a shaft of perhaps two hundred yards. The descent was affected by means of
metallic bars projecting from the sides of the well, and these being adapted to the needs
of a creature much smaller and lighter than myself. I was speedily cramped and fatigued
by the descent, and not simply fatigued. One of the bars bent suddenly under my weight
and almost swung me off into the blackness beneath. For a moment I hung by one hand,
and after that experience I did not dare to rest again, though my arms and back were presently
acutely painful. I went on clamoring down the sheer descent with as quick a motion as
possible. Glancing upward, I saw the aperture, a small blue disk in which a star was visible,
while little Weena's head showed as a round black projection. The thudding sound of a
machine below grew louder and more oppressive. Everything save that little disk above was
profoundly dark, and when I looked up again, Weena had disappeared. I was in an agony
of discomfort. I had some thought of trying to go up the shaft again and leave the underworld
alone, but even while I turned this over in my mind, I continued to descend. At last,
with intense relief, I saw dimly coming up, a foot to the right of me, a slender loophole
in the wall. Swinging myself in, I found it was the aperture of a narrow horizontal tunnel
in which I could lie down and rest. It was not too soon my arms ached, my back was cramped,
and I was trembling with the prolonged terror of a fall. Besides this, the unbroken darkness
had had a distressing effect upon my eyes. The air was full of the throb and hum of machinery
pumping air down the shaft. I do not know how long I lay. I was roused by a soft hand
touching my face. Starting up in the darkness, I snatched at my matches, and hastily striking
one I saw three stooping white creatures similar to the one I had seen above ground in the
ruin, hastily retreating before the light, living as they did in what appeared to me
in penetrable darkness. Their eyes were abnormally large and sensitive, just as are the pupils
of the abysmal fishes, and they reflected the light in the same way. I have no doubt
they could see me in that rayless obscurity, and they did not seem to have any fear of
me apart from the light. But so soon as I struck a match in order to see them, they
fled incontinently, vanishing into dark gutters and tunnels, from which their eyes glared
at me in the strangest fashion. I tried to call to them, but the language they had was
apparently different from that of the overworld people, so that I was needs left to my own
unaided efforts, and the thought of flight before exploration was even then in my mind.
But I said to myself, You are in for it now. And feeling my way along the tunnel, I found
the noise of machinery grow louder. Presently the walls fell away from me, and I came to
a large open space, and, striking another match, saw that I had entered a vast arched
cavern, which stretched into utter darkness beyond the range of my light. The view I had
of it was as much as one could see in the burning of a match. Necessarily my memory
is vague. Great shapes like big machines rose out of the dimness, and cast grotesque black
shadows in which dim spectral moorlocks sheltered from the glare. The place, by the by, was
very stuffy and oppressive, and the faint halitus of freshly shed blood was in the air.
Some way down the central vista was a little table of white metal, laid with what seemed
a meal. The moorlocks at any rate were carnivorous. Even at the time I remember wondering what
large animal could have survived to furnish the red joint I saw. It was all very indistinct,
the heavy smell, the big unmeaning shapes, the obscene figures lurking in the shadows
and only waiting for the darkness to come at me again. Then the match burned down and
stung my fingers and fell, a wriggling red spot in the blackness.
I have thought since how particularly ill-equipped I was for such an experience. When I had started
with the time machine I had started with the absurd assumption that the men of the future
would certainly be infinitely ahead of ourselves in all their appliances. I had come without
arms, without medicine, without anything to smoke. At times I missed tobacco frightfully,
even without enough matches. If only I had thought of a Kodak! I could have flashed that
glimpse of the underworld in a second and examined it at leisure. But as it was I stood
there with only the weapons and the powers that nature had endowed me with, hands, feet,
and teeth, these, and four safety-matches that still remained to me. I was afraid to
push my way in among all this machinery in the dark, and it was only with my last glimpse
of light I discovered that my store of matches had run low. It had never occurred to me
until that moment that there was any need to economize them, and I had wasted almost
half the box in astonishing the upper-worlders to whom fire was a novelty. Now, as I say,
I had four left, and while I stood in the dark a hand touched mine, lank fingers came
feeling over my face, and I was sensible of a peculiar, unpleasant odor. I fancied I
heard the breathing of a crowd of those dreadful little beings about me. I felt the box of
matches in my hand being gently disengaged and other hands behind me plucking at my clothing.
The sense of these unseen creatures examining me was indescribably unpleasant. The sudden
realization of my ignorance of their ways of thinking and doing came home to me very
vividly in the darkness. I shouted at them as loudly as I could. They started away, and
even then I could feel them approaching me again. They clutched at me more boldly, whispering
odd sounds to each other. I shivered violently and shouted again rather discordantly. This
time they were not so seriously alarmed, and they made a queer laughing noise as they came
back at me. I will confess I was horribly frightened. I determined to strike another
match and escape under the protection of its glare. I did so, and eking out the flicker
with a scrap of paper from my pocket, I made good my retreat to the narrow tunnel.
But I had scarce entered this when my light was blown out, and in the blackness I could
hear the Morlocks rustling like wind among leaves and pattering like rain as they hurried
after me. In a moment I was clutched by several hands, and there was no mistaking that they
were trying to haul me back. I struck another light and waved it in their dazzled faces.
You can scarce imagine how nauseatingly inhuman they looked, those pale, chinless faces and
great lidless pinkish-grey eyes, as they stared in their blindness and bewilderment.
But I did not stay to look. I promise you I retreated again, and when my second match
had ended I struck my third. It had almost burned through when I reached the opening
into the shaft. I lay down on the edge, for the throb of the great pump below made me
giddy. Then I felt sideways for the projecting hooks, and as I did so my feet were grasped
from behind, and I was violently tugged backward. I lit my last match, and it incontinently
went out. But I had my hand on the climbing bars now, and, kicking violently, I disengaged
myself from the clutches of the moorlocks, and was speedily clamouring up the shaft while
they stared peering and blinking up at me. All but one little wretch who followed me for
some way, and well nigh secured my boot as a trophy.
That climb seemed interminable to me. With the last twenty or thirty feet of it a deadly
nausea came upon me. I had the greatest difficulty in keeping my hold. The last few yards was
a frightful struggle against this faintness. Several times my head swam, and I felt all
the sensations of falling. At last, however, I got over the well-mouth somehow, and staggered
out of the ruin into the blinding sunlight. I fell upon my face. Even the soil smelt
sweet and clean. Then I remember Weena kissing my hands and ears, and the voices of others
among the alloy. Then, for a time, I was insensible.